MUTUAL FUND SOLUTIONS

Next-generation proxy voting
How data-driven analytics, omni-channel delivery and
blockchain are helping mutual funds achieve their proxy goals.

Forward-looking funds use next-gen technologies to
transform today’s challenges into tomorrow’s opportunities.
Gone are the days where proxy mailings and phone calls represent
the only means of shareholder engagement. Today, innovations
are helping funds target and engage shareholders in ways that
strengthen long-term relationships and maximize participation.

When it comes to proxy voting, mutual funds face
unique challenges. Unlike corporate issuers, mutual
funds rely heavily on retail shareholders who are less
likely to vote. Low voter interest combined with a
lack of actionable shareholder data makes it harder
to drive engagement.
On the back end, mutual funds struggle to ensure
vote integrity — missing votes and overvoting
sometimes throw meeting outcomes into question.
And increasing costs continue to plague even the
most well-planned campaigns.

INNOVATORS DON’T ABANDON
TRADITIONAL METHODS OF
ENGAGEMENT. INSTEAD, THEY
BUILD ON PROVEN TECHNIQUES.

2

BROADRIDGE

To address these challenges, best practices
suggest supplementing traditional, paper-based
communications with next-gen digital tools to execute
comprehensive strategies that improve outcomes
while lowering overall costs. Below are the myriad
ways leading funds leverage new technologies to
transform governance and the proxy process.

In this paper, you’ll discover how new
technologies, like advanced analytics,
omni-channel communication and
blockchain can help funds:
PLAN THE VOTE
Execute data-driven campaign planning
and management.
DRIVE THE VOTE
Deliver more impactful communications.
CAPTURE THE VOTE
Make voting easier for shareholders.
PROCESS THE VOTE
Transform processing and reconciliation.

NEXT-GENERATION PROXY VOTING

3

AN UPHILL CLIMB

Corporate issuers can rely almost exclusively on institutional
shareholders to achieve their voting goals — a whopping
91 percent of institutional shares were voted in the last
six years. Mutual funds, by contrast, enjoy no such luxury.
Roughly 95 percent of all accounts holding mutual fund
shares are retail accounts, which vote at much lower rates.
In fact, over the last six years, only 12 percent of retail
accounts holding mutual funds voted their shares.
Such low retail voting rates pose serious risks for funds.
Mutual fund proxy votes occur only when there is a proposal
significantly impacting the fund’s prospectus, or involves
the approval of a merger, new governance arrangement or
advisory contract. If a mutual fund cannot attain quorum
and garner enough votes to ensure proposal passage, the
ramifications can be costly. Mergers might be abandoned
altogether, advisory contracts can lapse and funds may
forfeit incurred expense.
Mutual funds must be far more proactive than corporate
issuers when it comes to driving — and processing — the
vote. Funds must get it right the first time. From vote
planning to reconciliation and validation, there’s little room
for error.

BY THE NUMBERS: MUTUAL FUND PROXIES

91%

of institutional
shares were voted in
the last six years

4

BROADRIDGE

95%

of all accounts
holding mutual fund
shares are retail
accounts

12%

of retail accounts
holding mutual funds
voted their
shares

PLAN THE VOTE
Execute data-driven campaign planning and management.

Any proxy solicitation campaign is essentially a math exercise.
You start with the total vote requirement, identify likely
institutional votes and then, finally, deduce outstanding retail
votes. The formula is easy enough. But the challenge is figuring
out what to plug into each variable. That’s where advanced data
analytics is the difference-maker.
Some funds use data aggregation technologies to compile
historical voting statistics. These tools enable funds to identify
who has voted in the past and who is likely to vote in the future.
Other funds rely on select proxy service providers for access to
enormous longitudinal datasets. Both approaches help unlock
segmented insight at a unique level of granular detail.
During voting, funds may perform a propensity-to-vote
analysis to identify specific shareholder groups and institutions
most likely to vote for or against a given proposal. From
there, they can more accurately forecast vote projections
and allocate resources.
Along with campaign planning, funds use analytics to
track and forecast votes in real time, enabling on-the-fly
adjustment. First, funds identify shareholders who haven’t
yet voted. Then, they issue targeted reminders based on an
analysis of communication methods most likely to generate
a response. There’s no reason to spend money on phone calls
to shareholders who are unlikely to respond. From planning
through execution, data-driven analysis and targeting helps
funds manage limited resources more effectively.

DISCRETIONARY VOTING:
REACH QUORUM FASTER

In certain cases, funds may rely on broker
discretionary voting to reach quorum.
Discretionary voting applies in cases where
the meeting agenda contains routine items.
These rules enable brokers to vote on behalf
of shareholders (if shareholders don’t provide
specific instruction). When planning a proxy,
it is important to know which brokers support
the discretionary voting and which do not.
You can access historical voting data to identify
brokers that tend to submit discretionary votes,
as well as brokers that tend to vote according to
management recommendations.
WHEN FUNDS BUILD A PROXY
SOLICITATION CAMPAIGN AROUND
DISCRETIONARY VOTING, THEY CAN
ACHIEVE QUORUM FASTER AND DRIVE
BETTER OUTCOMES.

NEXT-GENERATION PROXY VOTING

5

DRIVE THE VOTE
Deliver more impactful communications.

There’s an unfortunate myth in the proxy solicitation industry
that digital communication methods aren’t as effective as paper.
But the reality is that digital communications have proven to
help funds achieve their proxy goals. The most successful funds
have the full arsenal at the ready: social media, video, mobile,
email, text messaging and digital delivery, in addition to printed
mailings and outbound calling.
Importantly, funds that adopt digital communications don’t stop
using alternative methods altogether.
A multi-pronged, omni-channel approach combines the best of
both worlds. Paper proxies are effective. Paper proxies followed
by social media reminders are more effective still.

The key is finding ways to leverage
digital tools to make
traditional methods more effective.

CHOOSE THE
BUDGET-FRIENDLY OPTION

Every fund knows that printing and distributing
paper ballots can be enormously expensive.
Postage alone consumes a significant portion
of a fund’s proxy solicitation budget. Phone
solicitation is an even pricier option.
Digital communication eliminates most of
those costs. You can easily scale up and deliver
multiple reminders with marginal additional
spend, making digital delivery an extremely
budget-friendly option.

Regardless of the approach, it’s vital to ensure that messaging is
compelling, engaging and on brand. Plain proxy statements often
go unread. That’s why industry leaders are using customized
proxies, with engaging visuals and content, to drive engagement.
The best funds even pay attention to small things, like enhanced
packaging, which boost open rates and generate
a better response.
Another area gaining attention is shareholder education. Many
shareholders call their advisor for help with proxy voting. It’s
imperative, therefore, to make sure advisors are informed and
knowledgeable, and can help navigate shareholders through the
process. Some funds send Q&As to advisors in advance. That
way, advisors are prepared to educate their clients about what’s
at stake and inform them of all available voting options.

6

BROADRIDGE

In the very near future,
it will be possible to
facilitate voting directly
via text messages.

The rise of social media and
text messaging
Social media platforms represent an incredible
opportunity for funds to maximize shareholder
participation. Native platform marketing tools
enable funds to target shareholders with
pinpoint accuracy (thanks to extremely rich
user analytics). Some funds even design ads
to target specific shareholder segments.

Text messaging is also gaining popularity.
Digital consent, text message notifications
and reminders can direct shareholders to
voting websites. Compared to phone calls,
text messaging is non-invasive. Shareholders
can respond at their convenience.

68%

of U.S. adults
report that
they are
Facebook users

75%

of those users
access Facebook
on a daily basis
Source: Pew Research Center

Text messaging combined with social
media advertising has been shown to
significantly boost voting rates. Best of
all, social media and text messaging are
comparatively cost-effective, especially
compared to mail and phone campaigns.

Year over year the Broadridge
mobile voting platform has seen

15% 27%
growth
in votes

growth in
shares voted

NEXT-GENERATION PROXY VOTING

7

CAPTURE THE VOTE
Make voting easier for shareholders.

Consumer expectations are changing as fast as technology
itself. Everything must be quicker, easier, more intuitive.
Shareholders want the same kind of experience they’re getting
everywhere else. No matter how sophisticated or advanced
targeting techniques are, funds can’t convert entitlements
if they don’t provide the convenience and accessibility
shareholders have come to expect.
If you want to get the vote, make it easy — and provide more
options. Each voting option translates into better outcomes
for funds.

HOW FUNDS ENABLE SHAREHOLDERS TO VOTE:

• Paper mailing

• Digital shareholder mailbox

• Phone

• Social media link

• Email

• Mobile voting site

TOP FIVE REASONS TO ADOPT
DIGITAL PROXY COMMUNICATIONS

1

Shareholders prefer it.

2

Competitors are stepping up.

3

It’s proven to work.

4

Speed matters.

5

It saves money.

Shareholders demand the same kind of
consumer-first experience they’re getting
everywhere else.

Funds that don’t use digital
communications are already behind.

• Text messaging

Shareholders who prefer digital channels vote at roughly the
same rate as paper-only shareholders. They also tend to vote
sooner and hold more shares (on average). For years, Broadridge
has helped funds expand the use of digital voting. Today, about
35 percent of proxy votes are cast via electronic ballots, slightly
below the 40 percent cast by paper ballots (the remaining
vote by various means, including touchtone phone, third-party
advisors and outbound solicitation). Expect this ratio to move
more toward electronic voting in the next few years.
Digital voting generates participation from a wider swath of
shareholders. Our internal data shows that digital tools are
more likely to bring first-time voters into the fold. In addition,
millennials and younger investors clearly respond more readily
to digital communications. Long-term opportunity is created
whenever funds make it easier to vote.

8

BROADRIDGE

Shareholders who choose digital
communications vote at roughly the same
frequency as paper-only shareholders.

Funds minimize voting turnaround time
when they execute a digital-first strategy.

Digital communications alleviate much
of the costs associated with printing
and postage.

PROCESS THE VOTE
Transform processing and reconciliation.

In proxy voting, the question of who gets to vote is rather
simple. And yet, the reality is that our investment ecosystem
still contains too much uncertainty. In the last few decades,
the proxy vote system has expanded into a vast and sprawling
infrastructure, with multiple acting agents, issuers and brokers
all operating through an intermediated holding system.
Without accurate vote reconciliation, situations can arise
where the mutual fund believes they have reached quorum
when, in fact, they have not; or the fund may erroneously
believe they failed to achieve quorum when, in fact, they
have. In an era of increased shareholder activism, both of
these flaws pose significant risks.

At the extreme, successful meeting outcomes
could be overturned if all votes cannot be
reconciled with speed and accuracy.
To address these challenges, Broadridge has developed a
first-of-its-kind industry utility designed to streamline the
proxy vote reconciliation process. Given our position at the
center of the financial industry, we are uniquely positioned
to track, account for and accurately tabulate outstanding
shares to ensure only entitled beneficiaries vote — and to
ensure all votes are accurately counted.

THE BROADRIDGE
RECONCILIATION PROCESS

STEP 1

Receive data

STEP 2

Perform systematic
identification of
registered data

STEP 3

Conduct a systematic
entitlement match

STEP 4

Research data variances
and discrepancies

STEP 5

Apply final vote
entitlements

NEXT-GENERATION PROXY VOTING

9

Tomorrow’s technology
How blockchain eliminates the need for post-vote reconciliation.
Recently, Broadridge completed a successful
pilot with a corporate issuer using blockchain
technology to revolutionize the way proxy
votes are distributed, managed and tabulated.
Although the technology is not yet available
for open-end mutual funds, our engineers are
finding promising applications for ETFs and
closed-end funds.

Blockchain streamlines the proxy-voting
process by using distributed
ledger technology to generate
an immutable and shared
record of all voting activity.

10 BROADRIDGE

The hyper-secure blockchain recordkeeping
mechanism enables real-time proxy vote
reconciliation, driving improved efficiency, cost
savings and confidence.
The advantage is clear: Since there is only one
recordkeeping system, built on a distributed
ledger, there’s no need to reconcile multiple
databases or systems. Problems associated with
overvoting and missing votes are eliminated
during the voting process, making post-vote
reconciliation unnecessary.
In the end, all parties are confident in the voting
outcome because there is a single, immutable
record of all transactions.

Blockchain maximizes voting efficiency, security and confidence
Here’s how the process works: Issuers import
meeting information onto a distributed ledger
(decentralized database), including agenda
items and event details. At the same time, the
fund may define specific rules related to the
meeting. These rules establish what’s called a
“smart contract.”

A smart contract is a computer protocol
that contains the processing logic for the
shareholder meeting. It specifies things like:
• When notifications should be distributed
• What constitutes quorum
• Who is entitled to vote
• Which parties can have access to what
information and when

CUSTODIANS

MEETING SMART CONTRACT
ISSUER AGENT

SUB-CUSTODIANS

INVESTORS/
VOTING AGENTS

DISTRIBUTED LEDGER

Entitled voters will be able to use Broadridge
proxy systems to cast their votes onto the
distributed ledger. Each time a vote is imported
onto the ledger, it creates an individual
cryptographically-signed block. Because each
block is an immutable record in the chain, the
blockchain guarantees data privacy and security.

NEXT-GENERATION PROXY VOTING 11

INNOVATE TODAY. TRANSFORM TOMORROW.
For more than 50 years, Broadridge’s industry-leading innovation
has transformed proxy voting for thousands of clients. Broadridge
manages the end-to-end proxy voting process across all distribution
channels — from project planning and management, mailing and
solicitation to voting tabulation. Our access to more than 800
banks and brokers, as well as historical voting data, enables our
clients to provide targeted, cost-effective campaigns that maximize
engagement and long-term loyalty.

LOOKING FOR MORE?
Contact the contributors to this paper:
Michael Collins
Vice President and General Manager
Mutual Fund Proxy Solutions
michael.collins@broadridge.com
Kristen Wisdom
Assistant Vice President
Mutual Fund Proxy Solutions
kristen.wisdom@broadridge.com

Broadridge Financial Solutions (NYSE: BR), a global Fintech leader with $5 billion in revenues, provides the
critical infrastructure that powers investing, corporate governance, and communications to enable better financial
lives. We deliver technology-driven solutions that drive business transformation for banks, broker-dealers, asset
and wealth managers and public companies. Broadridge’s infrastructure serves as a global communications hub
enabling corporate governance by linking thousands of public companies and mutual funds to tens of millions of
individual and institutional investors around the world. Our technology and operations platforms underpin the
daily trading of more than U.S. $9 trillion of equities, fixed income and other securities globally.

broadridge.com

© 2022 Broadridge Financial Solutions, Inc., Broadridge and the Broadridge
logo are registered trademarks of Broadridge Financial Solutions, Inc.
AM_00224_WP_22

