United States Government Accountability Office

GAO

Report to Congressional Requesters

June 2007

CORPORATE
SHAREHOLDER
MEETINGS
Issues Relating to
Firms That Advise
Institutional Investors
on Proxy Voting

GAO-07-765

June 2007

CORPORATE SHAREHOLDER MEETINGS
Accountability Integrity Reliability

Highlights
Highlights of GAO-07-765, a report to
congressional requesters

Issues Relating to Firms That Advise
Institutional Investors on Proxy Voting

Why GAO Did This Study

What GAO Found

At annual meetings, shareholders
of public corporations can vote on
various issues (e.g., mergers and
acquisitions) through a process
called proxy voting. Institutional
investors (e.g., mutual funds and
pension funds) cast the majority of
proxy votes due to their large stock
holdings. In recent years, concerns
have been raised about a group of
about five firms that provide
research and recommendations on
proxy votes to their institutional
investor clients.

Various potential conflicts of interest can arise at proxy advisory firms that
could affect vote recommendations, but SEC has not identified any major
violations in its examinations of such firms. In particular, the business
model of the dominant proxy advisory firm—Institutional Shareholder
Services (ISS)—has been the most commonly cited potential conflict.
Specifically, ISS advises institutional investors how to vote proxies and
provides consulting services to corporations seeking to improve their
corporate governance. Critics contend that corporations could feel
obligated to retain ISS’s consulting services in order to obtain favorable vote
recommendations. However, ISS officials said they have disclosed and
taken steps to mitigate this potential conflict. For example, ISS discloses the
potential conflict on its Web site and the firm’s policy is to advise clients of
relevant business practices in all proxy vote analyses. ISS also maintains
separate staff who are located in separate buildings for the two businesses.
While all institutional investors GAO spoke with that use ISS’s services said
they are satisfied with its mitigation procedures, some industry analysts
continue to question their effectiveness. SEC conducts examinations of
advisory firms that are registered as investment advisers and has not
identified any major violations.

GAO was asked to report on
(1) potential conflicts of interest
that may exist with proxy advisory
firms and the steps that the
Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) has taken to
oversee these firms; (2) the factors
that may impede or promote
competition within the proxy
advisory industry; and
(3) institutional investors’ use of
the firms’ services and the firms’
potential influence on proxy vote
outcomes.
GAO reviewed SEC examinations
of proxy advisory firms, spoke with
industry professionals, and
conducted structured interviews
with 31 randomly selected
institutional investors.
GAO is not making any
recommendations.
GAO provided a draft of this report
to SEC for its review and comment.
SEC provided technical comments,
which GAO incorporated, as
appropriate.
www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-07-765.
To view the full product, including the scope
and methodology, click on the link above.
For more information, contact Yvonne Jones
at (202) 512-8678 or jonesy@gao.gov.

Although new firms have entered the market, ISS’s long-standing position
has been cited by industry analysts as a barrier to competition. ISS has
gained a reputation for providing comprehensive services, and as a result,
other firms may have difficulty attracting clients. Proxy advisory firms must
offer comprehensive coverage to compete and need sophisticated systems to
provide the services clients demand. But firms interested in entering the
market do have access to much of the information needed to make
recommendations, such as publicly available documents filed with SEC.
Competitors have attempted to differentiate themselves from ISS by, for
example, providing only proxy advisory services and not corporate
consulting services. While these firms have attracted clients, it is too soon to
tell what their ultimate effect on enhancing competition will be.
Among the 31 institutional investors GAO spoke with, large institutions
reportedly rely less than small institutions on the research and
recommendations offered by proxy advisory firms. Large institutional
investors said that their reliance on proxy advisory firms is limited because,
for example, they have in-house staff to assess proxy vote issues and only
use the research and recommendations offered by proxy advisory firms to
supplement such research. In contrast, small institutional investors have
limited resources to conduct their own research and tend to rely more
heavily on the research and recommendations offered by proxy advisory
firms. The fact that large institutional investors cast the great majority of
proxy votes made by institutional investors and reportedly place relatively
less emphasis on advisory firm research and recommendations could serve
to limit the firms’ overall influence on proxy voting results.
United States Government Accountability Office

Contents

Letter

1
Results in Brief
Background
Potential Conflicts of Interest Exist among Proxy Advisory Firms
That Could Affect Their Vote Recommendations, but SEC Has
Not Identified Any Major Violations in Its Examinations of
Registered Firms
Analysts Cite ISS’s Long-standing Position in the Industry as a
Potential Barrier to Competition, Although Firms Have Entered
the Market in Recent Years
Large Institutional Investors Reportedly Rely Less Than Small
Institutional Investors on Advisory Firms, Limiting the Influence
These Firms Have on Proxy Voting Results
Agency Comments

3
6

9

13

15
18

Appendix I

Scope and Methodology

20

Appendix II

GAO Contact and Staff Acknowledgments

23

Table 1: Overview of the Major Proxy Advisory Firms
Table 2: Reliance of Large Institutional Investors on Proxy
Advisory Firms

13

Tables

Page i

15

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

Abbreviations
Egan-Jones
Glass Lewis
ICS
ISS
MCG
PGI
PWBA
SEC

Egan-Jones Proxy Services
Glass Lewis & Co.
ISS Corporate Services, Inc.
Institutional Shareholder Services, Inc.
Marco Consulting Group
Proxy Governance, Inc.
Pension Welfare Benefits Administration
Securities and Exchange Commission

This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the
United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further
permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or
other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to
reproduce this material separately.

Page ii

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

United States Government Accountability Office
Washington, DC 20548

June 29, 2007
The Honorable Spencer Bachus
Ranking Member
Committee on Financial Services
House of Representatives
The Honorable Deborah Pryce
Ranking Member
Subcommittee on Capital Markets,
Insurance, and Government Sponsored Enterprises
Committee on Financial Services
House of Representatives
The Honorable Richard Baker
House of Representatives
Each year, publicly traded corporations hold shareholder meetings for
director elections and to consider management and shareholder proposals
that may have an effect on a corporation’s operations and value, such as
executive compensation, corporate governance matters, and proposed
mergers and acquisitions. Most shareholders typically do not attend these
meetings, opting instead to vote by mail or online, through a process
known as proxy voting. According to Automatic Data Processing, Inc.—
one of the largest providers of transaction services to the financial
industry—most proxy votes are cast by or on behalf of institutional
investors, such as mutual funds and pension plans, given the level of
stocks they manage as compared to other types of investors.
In recent years, concerns have been raised about the proxy advisory
industry, which is comprised of five major proxy advisory firms that help
many institutional investors carry out their fiduciary responsibilities
relating to proxy voting.1 These proxy advisory firms may perform several

1

See Proxy Voting by Investment Advisers, 68 Fed. Reg. 6585 (2003) (final rule) (codified
in various sections of 17 C.F.R. Part 275), which requires registered investment advisers to
adopt policies and procedures reasonably designed to ensure that they vote proxies in the
best interests of their clients. Similarly, the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1974 (ERISA) has been interpreted as imposing fiduciary obligations on persons authorized
to vote proxies associated with equity securities owned by ERISA plans. See 29 C.F.R. §
2509.94-2 (2006).

Page 1

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

functions on behalf of their clients, such as offering research and
recommendations on particular proxy issues (e.g., whether to approve an
executive compensation plan) or casting the actual votes. Critics of proxy
advisory firms, including certain industry associations and academics,
contend that the proxy advisory industry suffers from significant conflicts
of interest and a lack of competition and that these firms have a
disproportionate influence on proxy voting. Others counter that the firms
provide a valuable service for institutional investors and note that such
clients are sophisticated market participants that are free to choose
whether and how to employ the services of proxy advisory firms.
Under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934,2 the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) regulates the proxy solicitation process with respect to
publicly traded equity securities, and SEC regulates the activities of proxy
advisory firms that are registered with SEC as investment advisers under
the Investment Advisers Act of 1940.3 Under SEC rules, when soliciting
proxies, certain information must be disclosed in writing to shareholders,
and such disclosure, referred to as a proxy statement, must be filed with
the agency.4 These proxy statements must include important facts about
the issues on which shareholders are asked to vote. Under the Investment
Advisers Act and related SEC rules, registered investment advisers are
required to take a variety of steps designed to help protect their clients.
For example, an investment adviser must disclose information about its
business practices and potential conflicts of interest to clients and
potential clients. SEC monitors compliance with the laws and rules
through, among other means, periodic examinations of registered
investment advisers. Based on examination findings, SEC may send letters
to investment advisers requiring them to correct identified deficiencies.
SEC may also take enforcement actions for more serious violations, as
deemed appropriate, such as seeking civil fines in federal district court.
Because of your interest in helping to ensure the integrity of proxy voting,
you asked us to provide an overview of proxy advisory firms and SEC’s
oversight of this industry. This report (1) identifies potential conflicts of
interest that may exist with proxy advisory firms and the steps that SEC

2

15 U.S.C. §§ 78a et seq.

3

Most, but not all, of the major proxy advisory firms have registered as investment advisers
with SEC, as will be discussed in this report.

4

See section 14 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (codified as amended at 15 U.S.C. §
78n) and related rules.

Page 2

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

has taken to oversee these firms; (2) discusses the factors that might
impede or promote competition in this industry; and (3) analyzes
institutional investors’ use of proxy advisory services to help vote proxies
and the influence proxy advisory firms may have on proxy voting.
To address these objectives, we conducted a literature review and
examined studies relating to the proxy advisory industry. In addition, we
identified and interviewed various professionals (experts, academics,
industry association representatives, and others) with knowledge of the
industry. To gain an understanding of SEC’s oversight of proxy advisory
firms, we reviewed relevant investment adviser regulations and
examination reports and interviewed agency officials. Further, we
conducted structured interviews with 31 institutional investors selected
randomly by type, including mutual funds, corporate pension funds,
government pension funds, and union pension funds, as well as some asset
management institutions, to gain an understanding of the ways in which
they use proxy advisory firms and the influence that such firms have on
proxy voting.5 Our sample was derived from Standard & Poor’s Money
Market Directories (January 2006), and consisted of a population of
institutional investors with over $1 billion in assets, including large and
small institutional investors from each type above this asset level. We
defined “large” and “small” institutional investors as the top and bottom 15
percent of each investor type. Large and small institutional investors
account for over 72 percent of the managed assets held by all of the
institutional investors with over $1 billion in assets. Although we randomly
selected these institutional investors, the size of the sample was small and
might not have been representative of the universe of institutional
investors. As a result, we could not generalize the results of this effort.
We conducted our work in Washington, D.C., between September 2006
and June 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards. See appendix I for more information on our scope and
methodology.

Results in Brief

Various potential conflicts of interest exist among proxy advisory firms
that could affect vote recommendations, but SEC has not identified any

5

For purposes of this report, the term “institutional investor” refers to both the institution
that owns the securities as well as an asset manager delegated the authority to vote proxies
on behalf of the investors as the context requires.

Page 3

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

major violations in its examinations of such registered firms. In particular,
the business model of the dominant advisory firm—Institutional
Shareholder Services, Inc. (ISS)—has been cited by industry participants
and analysts as creating a significant potential conflict of interest. ISS
advises institutional investor clients on how to vote their proxies and at
the same time provides consulting services to help corporations develop
management proposals and improve their corporate governance. Because
it provides both types of services, ISS could, for example, help a corporate
client develop an executive compensation proposal to be submitted for
shareholder approval while at the same time making a recommendation to
investor clients on how to vote for this proposal. ISS’s critics also contend
that this could lead corporations to feel obligated to retain ISS’s consulting
services in order to obtain favorable proxy vote recommendations.
However, ISS officials said that they have disclosed and taken steps to
help mitigate this potential conflict. For example, ISS publicly discloses
information about the potential conflict on its Web site and firm policy
requires relevant disclosures to its institutional investor clients. In
addition, ISS officials explained that the proxy advisory and corporate
consulting businesses have separate staff, operate in separate buildings,
and use segregated office equipment and information databases. While all
institutional investors we spoke with that use ISS’s services said they are
satisfied with the steps ISS has taken to mitigate this potential conflict,
some industry analysts we contacted said there remains reason to question
the steps’ effectiveness. We also identified other potential conflicts
associated with proxy advisory firms. For example, owners or executives
of proxy advisory firms may have a significant ownership interest in or
serve on the board of directors of corporations that have proposals on
which the firms are offering vote recommendations. In its oversight
capacity, SEC conducts examinations of proxy advisory firms that are
registered as investment advisers, including, among other things, assessing
compliance with requirements of the Investment Advisers Act and related
rules, including the requirement that investment advisers identify,
disclose, and mitigate conflicts of interest. To date, SEC has not identified
any major violations and has not initiated any enforcement action against
proxy advisory firms.
ISS’s long-standing position in the proxy advisory industry has been cited
as a potential barrier to competition in this industry, although new firms
have entered the market in recent years. Since it began operating in 1985,
ISS has gained a reputation with institutional investors for providing
comprehensive proxy voting research and recommendations.
Consequently, other providers may have difficulty attracting ISS’s
institutional client base of over 1,700 firms. According to industry

Page 4

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

participants, proxy advisory firms must offer comprehensive coverage of
public companies in order to compete, because institutional investors may
not be interested in subscribing to limited service offerings. Firms also
need to develop sophisticated information systems to provide the research
and vote-processing capabilities clients demand. But industry analysts also
explained that firms interested in entering the market do have access to
much of the information needed to conduct research, including the annual
and quarterly reports companies file with SEC. In addition, various
academics told us that once a firm has acquired the necessary technology
and research processes, the marginal cost of providing services to
additional clients and of updating and maintaining these services is
relatively low. Competitors that have entered the market in recent years
have attempted to differentiate themselves from ISS by, for example,
emphasizing that they provide only proxy advisory services and not
corporate consulting services. While these firms have attracted
institutional clients, it is too soon to tell what their ultimate effect will be
on enhancing industry competition.
Among the 31 institutional investors we spoke with, large institutions
reportedly relied less than small institutions on the research and specific
recommendations offered by proxy advisory firms to help decide how to
vote proxies. Specifically, large institutional investors reported that their
reliance on proxy advisory services is limited because these institutional
investors (1) conduct their own research and analyses to make voting
decisions and use the research and recommendations offered by proxy
advisory firms only to supplement such analyses; (2) might develop their
own voting policies, which the advisory firms would be responsible for
executing; and (3) might contract with more than one advisory firm to gain
a broader range of information on proxy issues. In contrast, small
institutional investors reported that they have limited resources to
conduct their own research and tend to rely more heavily on the research
and recommendations of proxy advisory firms. Like large institutional
investors, however, representatives of small institutions said that they are
ultimately responsible for proxy voting decisions and retain the right to
override recommendations made by advisory firms. While the institutional
investors we contacted might not have been representative of all
institutional investors, many industry analysts we spoke with agreed that
large institutions would place less emphasis than small institutions on
proxy advisory firms’ research and recommendations when deciding how
to vote. The fact that large institutional investors cast the great majority of
proxy votes made by institutional investors and reportedly place less
emphasis than small institutions on such research and recommendations

Page 5

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

could serve to limit the overall influence advisory firms have on proxy
voting results.
We provided a draft of this report to SEC for its review and comment. SEC
provided technical comments, which we incorporated, as appropriate. We
also provided relevant sections of the draft to the proxy advisory firms for
a technical review of the accuracy of the wording and made changes, as
appropriate, based on the firms’ comments.

Background

According to ISS, over 28,000 publicly-traded corporations globally send
out proxy statements each year that contain important facts about more
than 250,000 separate issues on which shareholders are asked to vote.
Votes are solicited on a variety of key issues that could potentially affect
the corporations’ value, such as the election of directors, executive
compensation packages, and proposed mergers and acquisitions, as well
as other, more routine, issues that may not affect value, such as approving
an auditor and changing a corporate name. The proxy statement typically
includes a proxy ballot (also called a proxy card) that allows shareholders
to appoint a third party (proxy) to vote on the shareholder’s behalf if the
shareholder decides not to attend the meeting. The shareholder may
instruct the proxy how to vote the shares or may opt to grant the proxy
discretion to make the voting decision. The proxy card may be submitted
to the company via the mail or online.
The proxy advisory industry has grown over the past 20 years as a result of
various regulatory and market developments. The management of a
mutual fund’s or pension plan’s assets, including the voting of proxies, is
often delegated to a person who is an investment adviser subject to the
Investment Advisers Act of 1940.6 In a 1988 letter, known as the “Avon
Letter,” the Department of Labor took the position that the fiduciary act of
managing employee benefit plan assets includes the voting of proxies

6

To the extent a mutual fund or pension plan has delegated the voting of its proxies to an
asset manager, the proxy voting process is subject to the Investment Advisers Act of 1940
and the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA). For purposes of this
report, the term “asset manager” is used to refer both to investment advisers of registered
investment companies, as well as to managers of pension plan assets. Registered
investment companies are also required to disclose the policies and procedures that they
use to determine how to vote proxies relating to portfolio securities and must file with SEC
an annual report on its proxy voting record. See 17 C.F.R. § 270.30b1-4 and SEC Forms N-1,
N-2, N-3 and N-CSR (adopted under the Investment Company Act of 1940 (codified as
amended at 15 U.S.C. § 80a-1 et seq.)).

Page 6

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

associated with shares of stock owned by the plan.7 According to industry
experts, managers of employee retirement plan assets began to seek help
in executing their fiduciary responsibility to vote proxies in their clients’
best interests. Consequently, the proxy advisory industry—particularly
ISS, which had been established in 1985—started to grow. According to
industry experts, ISS’s reputation and dominance in the proxy advisory
industry continued to grow in the 1990s and early 2000s, fueled by the
growing fiduciary requirements of institutional investors and increased
shareholder activism. This increased shareholder activism has been
attributed in part to reaction by investors to the massive financial frauds
perpetrated by management of public companies, including the actions
that led to the bankruptcies of Enron and WorldCom. Many institutional
investors sought the services of proxy advisory firms to assist in their
assessments of the corporate governance practices of publicly traded
companies and to carry out the mechanics of proxy voting. Finally, in
2003, SEC adopted a rule and amendments under the Investment Advisers
Act of 1940 that requires registered investment advisers to adopt policies
and procedures reasonably designed to ensure that proxies are voted in
the best interests of clients, which industry experts also cited as a reason
for the continued growth of the proxy advisory industry.8
Today, the proxy advisory industry is comprised of five major firms, with
ISS serving as the dominant player with over 1,700 clients. The other four
firms—Marco Consulting Group (MCG), Glass Lewis & Co. (Glass Lewis),
Proxy Governance, Inc. (PGI), and Egan-Jones Proxy Services (EganJones)—have much smaller client bases and are relatively new to the
industry: Glass Lewis, PGI, and Egan-Jones were all created within the
past 6 years.
•

Founded in 1985, ISS serves clients with its core business, which
includes analyzing proxy issues and offering research and vote
recommendations. ISS also provides Web-based tools and advisory

7

The Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Pension Welfare Benefits Administration (PWBA,
now known as the Employee Benefits Security Administration) issued the Avon letter to
Mr. Helmuth Fandl, Chairman of the Retirement Board of Avon Products, Inc., on February
23, 1988. Current U.S. Comptroller General David M. Walker was the Assistant Secretary of
Labor for the PWBA from 1987 to 1989. The Department of Labor subsequently issued
Interpretative Bulletin No. 94-2 (codified at 29 C.F.R. § 2509-94-2), which, among other
things, set forth the department’s interpretation of ERISA as it applies to the voting of
proxies on securities held by employee benefit plan investment portfolios. The bulletin
essentially restates the views set forth in the Avon Letter.
8

See Proxy Voting by Investment Advisers.

Page 7

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

services to corporate issuers through ISS Corporate Services, Inc. a
separate division established in 1997 which was spun-out into a whollyowned subsidiary in 2006. RiskMetrics Group, a financial risk
management firm, acquired ISS in January 2007. RiskMetrics Group
provides risk management tools and analytics to assist investors in
assessing risk in their portfolios.
•

MCG was established in 1988 to provide investment analysis and advice
to Taft-Hartley funds and has since expanded its client base to public
employee benefit plans.9

•

Glass Lewis, established in 2003, provides proxy research and voting
recommendations and was acquired by Xinhua Finance Limited, a
Chinese financial information and media company, in 2007.

•

Established in 2004, PGI offers proxy advice and voting
recommendations and is a wholly-owned subsidiary of FOLIOfn, Inc., a
financial services company that also provides brokerage services and
portfolio management technology for individual investors and
investment advisers.

•

Egan-Jones was established in 2002 as a division of Egan-Jones Ratings
Company, which was incorporated in 1992. Egan-Jones provides proxy
advisory services to institutional clients to facilitate making voting
decisions.

Of the five major proxy advisory firms, three—ISS, MCG, and PGI—are
registered with SEC as investment advisers and are subject to agency
oversight, while according to corporate officials, the other two firms are
not. In their SEC registration filings, the three registered firms have
identified themselves as pension consultants as the basis for registering as

9

The Labor Management Relations Act, also known as the Taft-Hartley Act, allows for the
establishment of multiemployer trust funds, known as Taft-Hartley funds, for the purpose
of providing pension and welfare benefits to employees and their families. Act of June 23,
1947, ch. 120, 61 Stat. 136 (1947) (codified as amended at 29 U.S.C. §§ 141 et seq.). These
funds, or benefit plans, are financed in whole or part by employer contributions and are
administered jointly by labor and management. These funds are subject to ERISA and
regulated by the U.S. Department of Labor. Accordingly, managers of Taft-Hartley fund
assets have a fiduciary obligation to protect plan assets as required by ERISA.

Page 8

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

investment advisers under the Investment Advisers Act.10 Although Glass
Lewis initially identified itself as a pension consultant and registered with
SEC as an investment adviser, it withdrew its registration in 2005.
According to SEC officials, an investment adviser is not required to
disclose a reason for its decision to withdraw its registration in the notice
of withdrawal filed with SEC. Officials from Glass Lewis and Egan-Jones
did not elaborate on their decisions not to be registered with SEC as
investment advisers, other than to note that their decisions were made
with advice from their respective counsel.

Potential Conflicts of
Interest Exist among
Proxy Advisory Firms
That Could Affect
Their Vote
Recommendations,
but SEC Has Not
Identified Any Major
Violations in Its
Examinations of
Registered Firms

In the proxy advisory industry, various conflicts of interest can arise that
have the potential to influence the research conducted and voting
recommendations made by proxy advisory firms. The most commonly
cited potential for conflict involves ISS, which provides services to both
institutional investor clients and corporate clients. Several other
circumstances may lead to potential conflicts on the part of proxy
advisory firms, including situations in which owners or executives of
proxy advisory firms have an ownership interest in or serve on the board
of directors of corporations that have proposals on which the firms are
offering vote recommendations. Although the potential for these types of
conflicts exists, in its examinations of proxy advisory firms that are
registered as investment advisers, SEC has not identified any major
violations, such as a failure to disclose a conflict, or taken any
enforcement actions to date.

ISS’s Business Model Has
Been Identified as the
Major Potential Conflict of
Interest

Industry professionals and institutional investors we interviewed cited
ISS’s business model as presenting the greatest potential conflict of
interest associated with proxy advisory firms because ISS offers proxy
advisory services to institutional investors as well as advisory services to
corporate clients. Specifically, ISS provides institutional investor clients

10

Section 203A of the Investment Advisers Act prohibits state-regulated investment advisers
who have less than $25 million in assets under management from registering with SEC,
unless the person is an investment adviser to a registered investment company, like a
mutual fund. SEC Rule 203A-2(b), exempts certain pension consultants from this general
prohibition and permits them to register with SEC. 17 C.F.R. § 275.203A-2(b). An
investment adviser is a pension consultant for purposes of Rule 203A-2(b), if he or she
provides investment advice relating to assets of certain employee benefit plans having an
aggregate value of at least $50 million.

Page 9

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

with recommendations for proxy voting and ratings of companies’
corporate governance. In addition, ISS helps corporate clients develop
proposals to be voted on and offers corporate governance consulting
services to help clients understand and improve their corporate
governance ratings.
Because ISS provides services to both institutional investors and
corporate clients, there are various situations that can potentially lead to
conflicts. For example, some industry professionals stated that ISS could
help a corporate client design an executive compensation proposal to be
voted on by shareholders and subsequently make a recommendation to
investor clients to vote for this proposal. Some industry professionals also
contend that corporations could feel obligated to subscribe to ISS’s
consulting services in order to obtain favorable proxy vote
recommendations on their proposals and favorable corporate governance
ratings. One industry professional further believes that, even if
corporations do not feel obligated to subscribe to ISS’s consulting
services, they still could feel pressured to adopt a particular governance
practice simply to meet ISS’s standards even though the corporations may
not see the value of doing so.
ISS has disclosed and taken steps to help mitigate situations that can
potentially lead to conflicts. For example, on its Web site, ISS explains that
it is “aware of the potential conflicts of interest that may exist between
[its] proxy advisory service … and the business of ISS Corporate Services,
Inc. [ICS].” The Web site also notes that “ISS policy requires every ISS
proxy analysis to carry a disclosure statement advising the client of the
work of ICS and advising ISS’s institutional clients that they can get
information about an issuer’s use of ICS’s products and services.” In
addition, some institutional investors we spoke with noted that ISS has on
occasion disclosed to them, on a case-by-case basis, the existence of a
specific conflict related to a particular corporation.
In addition to disclosure, ISS has implemented policies and procedures to
help mitigate potential conflicts. For example, according to ISS, it has
established a firewall that includes maintaining separate staff for its proxy
advisory and corporate businesses, which operate in separate buildings
and use segregated office equipment and information databases in order to
help avoid discovery of corporate clients by the proxy advisory staff. ISS
also notes on its Web site that it is a registered investment adviser and is
subject to the regulatory oversight of SEC. In addition, according to ISS’s
Web site, corporations purchasing advisory services sign an agreement

Page 10

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

acknowledging that use of such services does not guarantee preferential
treatment from ISS’s division that provides proxy advisory services.
All of the institutional investors—both large and small—we spoke with
that subscribe to ISS’s services said that they are satisfied with the steps
that ISS has taken to mitigate its potential conflicts. Most institutional
investors also reported conducting due diligence to obtain reasonable
assurance that ISS or any other proxy advisory firm is independent and
free from conflicts of interest. As part of this process, many of these
institutional investors said they review ISS’s conflict policies and
periodically meet with ISS representatives to discuss these policies and
any changes to ISS’s business that could create additional conflicts.
Finally, as discussed in more detail later in this report, institutional
investors told us that ISS’s recommendations are generally not the sole
basis for their voting decisions, which further reduces the chances that
these potential conflicts would unduly influence how they vote.
Although institutional investors said they generally are not concerned
about the potential for conflicts from ISS’s businesses and are satisfied
with the steps ISS has taken to mitigate such potential conflicts, some
industry analysts we contacted said there remains reason to question the
steps’ effectiveness. For example, one academic said that while ISS is
probably doing a fair job managing its conflicts, it is difficult to confirm
the effectiveness of the firm’s mitigation procedures because ISS is a
privately-held company, thereby restricting information access. Moreover,
according to another industry analyst, because ISS’s recommendations are
often reported in the media, the corporate consulting and proxy advisory
services units could become aware of the other’s clients.

Other Potential Conflicts
May Arise on the Part of
Proxy Advisory Firms

In addition to the potential conflict of interest discussed above, several
other situations in the proxy advisory industry could give rise to potential
conflicts. Specifically:
•

Owners or executives of proxy advisory firms may have a significant
ownership interest in or serve on the board of directors of corporations
that have proposals on which the firms are offering vote
recommendations. A few institutional investors told us that such
situations have been reported to them by ISS and Glass Lewis, both of
which, in order to avoid the appearance of a conflict, did not make
voting recommendations.

Page 11

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

SEC Has Not Identified
Any Major Violations in Its
Oversight of Proxy
Advisory Firms That Are
Registered as Investment
Advisers

•

Institutional investors may submit shareholder proposals to be voted
on at corporate shareholder meetings. This raises concern that proxy
advisory firms will make favorable recommendations to other
institutional investor clients on such proposals in order to maintain the
business of the investor clients that submitted these proposals.

•

Several proxy advisory firms are owned by companies that offer other
financial services to various types of clients, as is common in the
financial services industry, where companies often provide multiple
services to various types of clients. This is the case at ISS, Glass Lewis,
and PGI, and may present situations in which the interests of different
sets of clients diverge.

SEC reviews registered investment advisers’ disclosure and management
of potential conflicts, as well as proxy voting situations where a potential
conflict may arise. Specifically, SEC’s Office of Compliance Inspections
and Examinations monitors the operations and conducts examinations of
registered investment advisers, including proxy advisory firms. An SEC
official stated that, as part of these examinations, SEC may review the
adequacy of disclosure of a firm’s owners and potential conflicts;
particular products and services that may present a conflict; the
independence of a firm’s proxy voting services; and the controls that are in
place to mitigate potential conflicts.11 As discussed previously, three of the
five proxy advisory firms (ISS, MCG, and PGI) are registered as investment
advisers while Glass Lewis and Egan-Jones are not. According to SEC, to
date, the agency has not identified any major violations of applicable
federal securities laws in its examinations of proxy advisory firms that are
registered as investment advisers and has not initiated any enforcement
action against these firms.12

11

We did not attempt to assess the adequacy of these examinations.

12

We cannot disclose the specific results of examinations because of SEC confidentiality
considerations.

Page 12

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

Analysts Cite ISS’s
Long-standing
Position in the
Industry as a Potential
Barrier to
Competition,
Although Firms Have
Entered the Market in
Recent Years

As the dominant proxy advisory firm, ISS has gained a reputation with
institutional investors for providing reliable, comprehensive proxy
research and recommendations, making it difficult for competitors to
attract clients and compete in the market. As shown below in table 1, ISS’s
client base currently includes an estimate of 1,700 institutional investors,
more than the other four major firms combined. Several of the
institutional investors we spoke with that subscribe to ISS’s services
explained that they do so because they have relied on ISS for many years
and trust it to provide reliable, efficient services. They said that they have
little reason to switch to another service provider because they are
satisfied with the services they have received from ISS over the years.
Because of ISS’s clients’ level of satisfaction, other providers of proxy
advisory services may have difficulty attracting their own clients. In
addition, because of its dominance and perceived market influence,
corporations may feel obligated to be more responsive to requests from
ISS for information about proposals than they might be to other, lessestablished proxy advisory firms, resulting in a greater level of access by
ISS to corporate information that might not be available to other firms.
Table 1: Overview of the Major Proxy Advisory Firms

Founded

Estimated
number of
employees

Estimated
number of
clients

Estimated
clients’ equity
assets (dollars)a

Institutional Shareholder
Services (ISS)

1985

630

1,700

25.5 trillion

Marco Consulting Group
(MCG)

1988

70

350

85 billion

Glass Lewis & Company
(Glass Lewis)

2003

70

300

15 trillion

Proxy Governance, Inc.
(PGI)

2004

31

100

1 trillion

Egan-Jones Proxy
Services (Egan-Jones)

2001

Not available

400

Not available

Firm

Source: GAO presentation of information provided by proxy advisory firms.
a

Clients’ equity assets refers to the total assets under management by the firms’ institutional investor
clients. There is overlap between proxy advisory firms’ clients’ equity assets since, as will be
discussed later in this report, some clients use the services of several proxy advisory firms.

Industry analysts explained that, in addition to overcoming ISS’s
reputation and dominance in the proxy advisory industry, proxy advisory
firms must offer comprehensive coverage of corporate proxies and
implement sophisticated technology to attract clients and compete. For
instance, institutional investors often hold shares in thousands of different

Page 13

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

corporations and may not be interested in subscribing to proxy advisory
firms that provide research and voting recommendations on a limited
portion of these holdings. As a result, proxy advisory firms need to provide
thorough coverage of institutional holdings, and unless they offer
comprehensive services from the beginning of their operations, they may
have difficulty attracting clients. In addition, academics and industry
experts we spoke with said that new firms need to implement a
sophisticated level of technology to provide the research and proxy vote
execution services that clients demand. The initial investment required to
develop and implement such technology can be a significant expense for
firms.
Although newer proxy advisory firms may face challenges attracting
clients and establishing themselves in the industry, several of the
professionals we spoke with believed that these challenges could be
overcome. For example, while firms may need to offer comprehensive
coverage of corporate proxies in order to attract clients and although ISS
might have access to corporate information that other firms do not, much
of the information needed to conduct research and offer voting
recommendations is easily accessible. Specifically, anyone can access
corporations’ annual statements and proxy statements, which are filed
with SEC, are publicly available, and contain most of the information that
is needed to conduct research on corporations and make proxy voting
recommendations. Also, although developing and implementing the
technology required to provide research and voting services can be
challenging, various industry professionals told us that once a firm has
done so, the marginal cost of providing services to additional clients and
of updating and maintaining such technology is relatively low.
Some of the competitors seeking to enter the proxy advisory industry in
recent years that we spoke with have offered their services as alternatives
to ISS. Specifically, they have attempted to differentiate themselves from
ISS by providing only proxy advisory services to institutional investor
clients. ISS’s competitors have chosen not to provide corporate consulting
services in part to avoid the potential conflicts that exist at ISS. Proxy
advisory firms have also attempted to differentiate themselves from the
competition on the basis of the types of services provided. For example,
some firms have started to focus their research and recommendation
services on particular types of proxy issues or on issues specific to
individual corporations.
The institutional investors we spoke with had a variety of opinions about
the level of competition in the industry. Some questioned whether the

Page 14

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

existing number of firms is sufficient, while others questioned whether the
market could sustain the current number of firms. However, many of the
institutional investors believe that increased competition could help
reduce the cost and increase the range of available proxy advisory
services. For example, some institutional investors said that they have
been able to negotiate better prices with ISS because other firms have
recently entered the market. While some of these newer proxy advisory
firms have attracted clients, it is too soon to tell what the firms’ ultimate
effect on competition will be.

Large Institutional
Investors Reportedly
Rely Less Than Small
Institutional Investors
on Advisory Firms,
Limiting the Influence
These Firms Have on
Proxy Voting Results

We conducted structured interviews with 31 randomly selected
institutional investors to gain an understanding of the ways in which they
use proxy advisory firms and the influence that such firms have on proxy
voting. Of the 20 large institutional investors we interviewed, 19 reported
that they use proxy advisory services in one or more ways that may serve
to limit the influence that proxy advisory firms have on proxy voting
results (see table 2), while only 1 reported relying heavily on a proxy
advisory firm’s research and recommendations.13

Table 2: Reliance of Large Institutional Investors on Proxy Advisory Firms
Use proxy Use proxy advisory
advisory firm to
firm to execute
supplement in- customized voting
house research
policy
Number of large
institutional investors
(out of 20 interviewed)a

15

14

Subscribe to
several proxy
advisory firms

8

Source: GAO analysis of structured interviews with 20 large institutional investors.
a

Many of the large institutional investors we spoke with explained that, although they subscribe to a
customized voting policy, they may also continue to use their proxy advisory firm to supplement their
own in-house research, subscribe to several proxy advisory firms, or both. This results in overlap
among the three categories of how these institutional investors use proxy advisory firms, as shown in
the table.

13
Of the 20 large institutional investors we spoke with, 7 were asset management
institutions that vote proxies on behalf of their clients. Many large and small institutional
investors we initially attempted to contact reported that they do not vote their own proxies.
Instead, these institutional investors said that companies that provide asset management
services also vote proxies on their behalf. We added these asset management institutions,
which were referred to us by pension funds, to our sample in order to understand the
extent to which they rely on proxy advisory services.

Page 15

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

The following summarizes several of the reasons that large institutional
investors’ reliance on proxy advisory firms’ research and
recommendations is limited:
•

Most of the large institutional investors we spoke with (15 out of 20)
reported that they generally rely more on their own in-house research
and analyses to make voting decisions than on the research and
recommendations provided by their proxy advisory services providers.
These institutional investors tend to have their own in-house research
staffs, and their in-house research reportedly drives their proxy voting
decisions. They explained that they use the research and
recommendations provided by proxy advisory firms to supplement
their own analysis and as one of many factors they consider when
deciding how to vote.

•

In addition, many (14) of the large institutional investors we contacted
reported that they subscribe to a customized voting policy that a proxy
advisory firm executes on the institutions’ behalf. These institutional
investors develop their own voting policies and guidelines that instruct
the advisory firm how to vote on any given proxy issue. In such
instances, the proxy advisory firms simply apply their clients’ voting
policies, which then drive the voting decisions.

•

Further, 8 of the large institutional investors we contacted explained
that they subscribe to more than one proxy advisory firm to help
determine how to vote. These institutional investors said that they
consider multiple sets of proxy advisory firm research and
recommendations to gain a broader range of information on proxy
issues and to help make well-informed voting decisions.

We also interviewed representatives from 11 smaller institutional
investors, and the results of these interviews suggest that proxy advisory
firm recommendations are of greater importance to these institutions than
they are to the large institutional investors we spoke with. In particular,
representatives from smaller institutional investors were more likely to
say that they rely heavily on their proxy advisory firm and vote proxies
based strictly on the research and recommendations of their firm, given
these institutions’ limited resources. Consequently, the level of influence
held by proxy advisory firms appears greater with these smaller
institutional investors.
However, whether large or small, all of the institutional investors we
spoke with explained that they retain the fiduciary obligation to vote
proxies in the best interest of their clients irrespective of their reliance on

Page 16

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

proxy advisory firms. Institutional investors emphasized that they do not
delegate this responsibility to proxy advisory firms and retain the right to
override any proxy advisory firm recommendations, limiting the amount of
influence proxy advisory firms hold. In addition, large and small
institutional investors reported that they tend to provide greater in-house
scrutiny to, and rely even less on, proxy advisory firm recommendations
about certain high-profile or controversial proxy issues, such as mergers
and acquisitions or executive compensation.
Institutional investors’ perspectives on the limited influence of proxy
advisory firms reflected what we heard from professionals that we spoke
with who have knowledge of the industry. Many of these industry analysts
and academics agreed that large institutional investors would be less likely
than small institutional investors to rely on proxy advisory firms, because
large institutions have the resources available to conduct research and
subscribe to more than one proxy advisory service provider. These
professionals also thought that large institutional investors would be likely
to use proxy advisory firms as one of several factors they consider in the
research and analysis they perform to help them decide how to vote
proxies. Further, several believed that small institutional investors would
be more likely to vote based strictly on proxy advisory firms’
recommendations, because they do not have the resources to conduct
their own research.
The results of our work suggest that the overall influence of advisory firms
on proxy vote outcomes may be limited. In particular, large institutional
investors, which cast the great majority of proxy votes made by all
institutional investors with over $1 billion in assets, reportedly place
relatively less emphasis on the firms’ research and recommendations than
smaller institutional investors. However, we could not reach a definitive
conclusion about the firms’ influence because the institutional investors
we contacted were not necessarily representative of all such investors.
Further, we could not identify any studies that comprehensively isolated

Page 17

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

advisory firm research and recommendations from other factors that may
influence institutional investors’ proxy voting.14

Agency Comments

We provided a draft of this report to SEC for its review and comment. SEC
provided technical comments, which we incorporated into the final report,
as appropriate. We also provided relevant sections of the draft to the
proxy advisory firms for a technical review of the accuracy of the wording
and made changes, as appropriate, based on the firms’ comments.

As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce the contents of
this report earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30
days from the report date. At that time we will provide copies of this
report to the Chairman and Ranking Member, Senate Committee on
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs; the Chairman, House Committee on
Financial Services; the Chairman, House Subcommittee on Capital
Markets, Insurance, and Government Sponsored Enterprises, Committee
on Financial Services; other interested committees; and the Chairman of
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). We will also make copies
available to others upon request. In addition, the report will be available at
no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs
have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-8678

14
We identified a study—”The Role of Advisory Services in Proxy Voting,” by Cindy R.
Alexander, Mark A. Chen, Duane J. Seppi, and Chester S. Spatt (Dec. 14, 2006)—that
examined the extent to which recommendations can influence vote outcomes and stock
prices by focusing on recommendations made by ISS that were reported in the media. The
authors documented “significant stock price movements around recommendation dates,
indicating that proxy advice brings new information to the market,” as well as “a robust
association between recommendations and contest outcomes after controlling for
differences in contest characteristics, voting rules, dissidents, and incumbents.” As the
authors note, “although not all ISS recommendations are reported in the media, restricting
attention to the newsworthy cases ensures that our sample consists of contests in which
the underlying issues are significant and the recommendation is most likely to play an
important role.” However, most of the institutional investors we spoke with reported that
they tend to provide greater in-house scrutiny to, and rely even less on, proxy advisory firm
recommendations about high-profile or controversial proxy issues, which are the
recommendations that would be more likely to appear in the media.

Page 18

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

or jonesy@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional
Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report.
Key contributors to this report are listed in appendix II.

Yvonne D. Jones
Director, Financial Markets
and Community Investment

Page 19

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

Appendix I: Scope and Methodology

Appendix I: Scope and Methodology

Our objectives were to (1) identify potential conflicts of interest that exist
with proxy advisory firms and the steps that the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) has taken to oversee these firms; (2) review the factors
that might impede or promote competition in this industry; and (3) analyze
institutional investors’ use of proxy advisory services to help vote proxies
and the influence proxy advisory firms may have on proxy voting.
To determine the types of potential conflicts of interest that could arise in
the proxy advisory industry, we conducted a literature review and
examined studies relating to potential conflicts that may arise in this
industry. Further, we interviewed various professionals with knowledge of
the proxy advisory industry, including industry experts, academics,
industry association representatives, and proxy advisory firm
representatives, as well as institutional investors and officials at SEC. We
selected these professionals based, in part, on literature searches we
conducted on topics relating to proxy advisory and corporate governance
services, as well as referrals by several of the professionals we met with.
The professionals we spoke with represent a wide range of perspectives,
and include experts from academia, business, government, and
professional organizations. We did not attempt to assess any of the proxy
advisory firms’ conflict mitigation policies or procedures and, therefore,
did not come to any conclusions about the adequacy of these policies or
procedures. To gain an understanding of SEC’s oversight of proxy advisory
firms, we reviewed relevant investment adviser regulations and
examinations conducted by SEC since 2000 and interviewed agency
officials. We did not attempt to assess the adequacy of SEC’s oversight.
To identify the factors that might impede or promote competition in this
industry, we reviewed the relevant literature and examined studies
relating to the level of competition in the industry, and we spoke with
various industry professionals. We did not attempt to evaluate the level of
competition in this industry and, therefore, did not come to any
conclusions about the extent to which competition exists.
Finally, to explore institutional investors’ use of proxy advisory services to
help vote proxies and the influence proxy advisory firms may have on
proxy voting, we conducted structured interviews with 31 institutional
investors selected randomly by type, including mutual funds, corporate
pension funds, government pension funds, and union pension funds, as
well as asset management institutions. Our sample included several of the
largest institutional investors and was derived from Standard & Poor’s
Money Market Directories (January 2006). The sample consisted of a
population of mutual funds and pension funds with over $1 billion in

Page 20

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

Appendix I: Scope and Methodology

assets, and included large and small institutional investors from each
investor type. We defined “large” and “small” institutional investors as the
top and bottom 15 percent of each institutional investor type. In total,
these large and small institutional investors accounted for over 72 percent
of assets under management held by mutual funds and pension funds with
over $1 billion under management. Although we randomly selected these
institutional investors, the size of the sample was small and may not
necessarily be representative of the universe of institutional investors. As
a result, we could not generalize the results of our analysis to the entire
population of institutional investors.
We conducted structured interviews with 20 large and 11 small
institutional investors. Initially, we had contacted a total of 126 mutual
funds and pension funds that were randomly selected from our sample of
institutional investors and 20 (13 large and 7 small institutions) reported
using proxy advisory firm services and agreed to participate in our
structured interviews. The other 106 institutional investors we had initially
contacted declined to participate in the structured interviews for several
reasons. In particular, many of these institutions said that they do not vote
proxies themselves, but rather hire asset management institutions to both
manage their investment portfolios and vote proxies on their behalf. We
conducted interviews with 11 (7 large and 4 small institutions) of these
asset management institutions, which were referred to us by several of the
pension funds we had initially contacted. The results of these asset
manager interviews are included among the total of 20 large and 11 small
institutional investors that we interviewed. In addition, some of the 106
institutional investors declined to participate because they vote proxies
themselves or do not vote proxies at all, while others refused to
participate or could not be reached.
In our structured interviews with the 31 institutional investors, we spoke
with officials from the organizations who are responsible for proxy voting
activities. We asked these officials a variety of questions relating to their
institutions’ policies on proxy voting and use of proxy advisory firms.
Further, we asked the officials to comment on potential conflicts of
interest associated with proxy advisory firms, steps taken to mitigate such
potential conflicts, and the level of competition in the proxy advisory
industry.
Finally, we spoke with various industry professionals discussed earlier to
gain their perspectives on the influence of proxy advisory firms. We could
not identify any studies that comprehensively measured the influence that
these firms have on proxy voting.

Page 21

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

Appendix I: Scope and Methodology

We conducted our work in Washington, D.C., between September 2006
and June 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards.

Page 22

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

Appendix II: GAO Contact and Staff
Acknowledgments

Appendix II: GAO Contact and Staff
Acknowledgments
GAO Contact

Yvonne D. Jones, (202) 512-8678 or jonesy@gao.gov

Staff
Acknowledgments

In addition to the above contact, Wes Phillips, Assistant Director; Emily
Chalmers; Rudy Chatlos; Eric Diamant; Fred Jimenez; Yola Lewis; and
Omyra Ramsingh made key contributions to this report.

(250312)

Page 23

GAO-07-765 Proxy Advisory Services

GAO’s Mission

The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation and
investigative arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its
constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and
accountability of the federal government for the American people. GAO
examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies;
and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help
Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO’s
commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of
accountability, integrity, and reliability.

Obtaining Copies of
GAO Reports and
Testimony

The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost
is through GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov). Each weekday, GAO posts
newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence on its Web site. To
have GAO e-mail you a list of newly posted products every afternoon, go
to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to Updates.”

Order by Mail or Phone

The first copy of each printed report is free. Additional copies are $2 each.
A check or money order should be made out to the Superintendent of
Documents. GAO also accepts VISA and Mastercard. Orders for 100 or
more copies mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Orders
should be sent to:
U.S. Government Accountability Office
441 G Street NW, Room LM
Washington, D.C. 20548
To order by Phone: Voice:
TDD:
Fax:

(202) 512-6000
(202) 512-2537
(202) 512-6061

Contact:

To Report Fraud,
Waste, and Abuse in
Federal Programs

Web site: www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm
E-mail: fraudnet@gao.gov
Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7470

Congressional
Relations

Gloria Jarmon, Managing Director, JarmonG@gao.gov (202) 512-4400
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7125
Washington, D.C. 20548

Public Affairs

Paul Anderson, Managing Director, AndersonP1@gao.gov (202) 512-4800
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149
Washington, D.C. 20548

PRINTED ON

RECYCLED PAPER

